Another great analysis technique to have in your toolkit is called effective dimensionality.
It's very similar to compression and dimension reduction, and provides some insights into the nature
of the shape of the data space inside the model.
That's important because the information that the model can process is limited by the dimensionality
of the data space.
As a very simple example, imagine that the only dimension you could use to describe the conditions
outside was temperature.
Now, temperature certainly is an informative metric, but it's not everything.
If you have the humidity as well, then that tells you a lot more information about what it's like outside.
So temperature and humidity would mean two dimensions of information.
And then perhaps cloud coverage would be a third dimension.
So the more dimensions the information is represented and processed in, the more contextual details
the model can represent and calculate.
Now, the precise interpretation of dimensionality here gets pretty tricky because there are so many
nonlinear transformations throughout the model.
And every linear transformation inside the model is both preceded and followed by a nonlinear transformation.
Nonetheless, effective dimensionality is still pretty interesting and I think can be quite useful in
mech interp analyses.
So let me begin with a reminder about principal components analysis.
The singular value decomposition and percent variance explained.
Actually, if you are unfamiliar with SVD, then I recommend going back to this video from earlier in
the course to get a refresher.
You do not need to watch the entire video, just the beginning part of the lecture where I provided
a high level intro to the singular value decomposition briefly and as a reminder of the reminder.
The idea is that we have a data set stored as a two dimensional matrix.
So rows and columns.
And then we take the SVD of that matrix.
And we get the singular values and singular vectors.
Now earlier in the course we were actually using these singular vectors.
But now here in this video and also in the next video, we don't actually care about the vectors per
se.
We're really just going to focus on the singular values for the analyses.
The singular values encode the importance of each direction in the data, and importance in the context
of PCA is the amount of variance along that direction.
So, for example, in this data set, PCA would identify this line as the most important direction in
the data, because the most amount of variance in the data aligns with this vector with this direction.
So this vector, this direction here would have a large singular value.
The next most important direction in this data would be this one.
And its singular value will be smaller.
Now we can plot all of the singular values in a plot, and that would look something like this.
This kind of plot is variously called the SVD spectrum, the singular value spectrum, or the scree
plot, or something like that.
Now here's the cool thing about singular values.
All of the singular vectors have unit norm, which means a magnitude of one.
And that means that the vectors themselves do not actually contain any information other than direction.
In other words, all of the variability in the data.
So all the variance, all the covariance across all the variables, it's all stored in the singular
values.
And technically it's the squared singular values because of the relationship between singular values
and eigenvalues of the data matrix transpose.
If you've taken a course on linear algebra, then that statement should sound familiar.
And if not, then don't worry about it.
The point is that 100% of the variability in the data is stored in the collection of singular values,
and therefore we can calculate how much variability is stored in each component or each direction using
this formula.
Here, where r squared is a general statistical term used to indicate the proportion of variance explained,
and the sigmas are the singular values.
So square all of the singular values, sum them all up, and then divide that into each of the individual
singular values.
That gives you the proportion of variance accounted for by each principal component.
And you can multiply this by 100 to get the percent variance explained.
So that's all fine.
But how do we get to effective dimensionality.
In fact the dimensionality of the data space is kind of trivial.
It's simply the number of tokens that you have in the sequence or the number of neurons in the layer.
Whichever of those two is smaller.
But that is the mathematical definition of the ambient dimensionality.
The effective dimensionality is actually determined by the data, not by the number of columns in the
matrix.
And I'd like to give you an example to help you understand this concept of effective dimensionality.
And then I'll get into the math.
So think about a piece of paper.
Technically this piece of paper is three dimensional.
But one of the dimensions is so thin that it cannot be used for any practical purpose.
So we really only use a piece of paper as a two dimensional object.
Of course, physically it exists in three dimensions.
But effectively the thickness dimension is so thin that it has no application value.
So we can say that a piece of paper has an effective dimensionality of two.
Here are some examples with data.
Let's first look at this one on the left.
These data live in two dimensions.
There are two axes, but all of the data points sit on a line.
So although the ambient dimensionality is two, the data really live in a one dimensional subspace.
So we can say that the effective dimensionality is one, although technically the true dimensionality
is two.
Now how about this one over here?
Certainly these data are strongly correlated.
Would you say that the effective dimensionality here is 1 or 2?
It's not really clear what the answer should be, because it depends on what you think of the variability
off of the diagonal.
Is this noise or is this important meaningful variability?
We could compress the data down to one dimension and then say that everything off the perfect diagonal
is noise.
We don't think it carries any meaningful information that we want to preserve in the analysis.
And that is basically how compression by dimension reduction works.
So let's say we have some threshold, and we say that the variability on this smaller axis is considered
noise if it's smaller than some amount, and we consider it meaningful and we do not want to compress
it out.
If it's bigger than that threshold.
And what do we take as a threshold in the context of PCA and the SVD, we can take the percent of total
data variability as a threshold.
So what you see in these plots here are the singular value spectrum of a data matrix converted to percent
variance, using the formula that I showed in the previous slide.
And this is the kind of pattern that you see very often in all sorts of data in biological systems and
physical systems and so on.
The first couple of components tend to account for a relatively large amount of variability.
And then that goes down.
And the other components account for a relatively small amount of variability.
And what you see over here is exactly the same data.
But now it's the cumulative sum.
So the first point down here is equal to this point over here it's around 25.
And then the second point here is around 40.
That is the cumulative sum of the first two points here.
So 25 plus 15 and so on.
So the interpretation of this cumulative variance explained plot is that, for example, if you take
the first 20 components, then that together all first 20 components together accounts for around 70%
of the total variability of the data set.
So now we can pick some threshold, let's say 80%.
And we can ask how many components in the data or in the PCA of the data does it take to account for
80% of the variance of the entire data set?
And that is the number that we take to be the effective dimensionality.
So let's say there are 100 components in total.
In this case we would say the effective dimensionality is around 55.
Now we cannot actually visualize a 100 dimensional space.
But the interpretation would be the same as this piece of paper.
So inside the LM there is a 100 dimensional space.
But all of the token embeddings are actually only really occupying 55 of those dimensions.
The other 45 dimensions are kind of like the width of the paper.
Now to be clear, a cumulative percent variance explained threshold of 80 is way too low.
Normally you would use 95 or 99%, maybe 99.9% of the variance.
But for illustration purposes, I didn't feel like going out to all of the 1000 components that are
actually in this dataset, just because I wanted to visualize this descent over here to the left.
So I'm just drawing these lines at 80, just to give you a visual intuition of the analysis.
And you will see how this actually looks when I switch to code in a few minutes.
And also just to be clear about the interpretation.
All of the dimensions are technically mathematically present, but there's such a tiny amount of variability
in these later components that we consider it to be noise or unimportant.
Of course, that is a huge assumption, and it is certainly very possible that tiny amounts of variance
in just the right dimensions, in just the right neurons are actually really important for guiding the
model forwards.
Nonetheless, you can run this kind of analysis and then compare the results for different layers or
different data sets, different token types or categories, different parts of speech, different context,
windows, etc., etc. it's quite a versatile method.
And even though there are some arbitrary features like what number to use as a threshold, the overall
patterns are going to be pretty similar when you compare for different categories or different layers.
So in the Python demo, in this video I will show you how to write and use and run the code to generate
these kinds of analyses.
And then in the code challenge in the next video, you are going to adapt and expand these methods to
a much bigger model, to more layers and to a couple of different data sets.
So here's what we're going to do in the Python demo.
I'll start by importing GPT two XL.
You have seen this model before.
It has 48 transformer blocks and an embeddings dimensionality of 1600.
And that is great because it means that when we set up the effective dimensionality analysis, we can
apply it to every single layer in exactly the same way, with exactly the same parameters and thresholds.
The tokens I will use to process the data and get the activations are from the book through the Looking
glass, which we've used several times before in this course.
And as a reference, what I'm going to do is completely scramble all of these tokens.
So it's exactly the same tokens in both analyses, but just with different orderings.
So that's a pretty interesting comparison, because any difference that we observe in effective dimensionality
cannot be attributable to the tokens themselves, but instead are entirely attributable to the order
in which the tokens appear.
Now for this analysis we will use the hidden state activations.
We're not using any hooks.
You know how to do that yourself if you want to follow up on those kinds of analyses.
But to keep it simple and to give some variety, I'm just going to show you.
Hidden state activations.
Remember that the hidden state activations correspond to the final outputs of each layer in the model,
including the initial embeddings, and then all of the transformer blocks.
So here is what the for loop looks like over all the layers where I extract the activations mean center.
Perform PCA, or at least the initial part of PCA using the SVD, and then calculate the percent variance
explained.
And here I find the number of components that it takes to account for 95% of the variability.
I will unpack what this line of code means and what it does when I switch to code.
This whole analysis here is then repeated for the shuffled tokens, and that will give me a plot that
looks like this.
So the color lines up here show the cumulative percent variance explained for the real tokens and the
shuffled tokens.
And the line color corresponds to the hidden layer with yellow lines going deeper into the model.
And then the scatter plot down here shows the transformer block on the x axis, and the number of dimensions
it takes to get to 95% variance explained on the y axis.
It's pretty interesting to see not only the laminar profile of dimensionality, expansion and contraction
and expansion, and a little bit of contraction again, but also the real difference between the real
tokens, the real token sequence order and the shuffled tokens.
And over here is also an interesting data point.
Remember that the first hidden state is the output of the token plus position embeddings.
Now, those appear to be exactly identical.
Or maybe really, really, really close.
Of course, that is a sensible result, considering that there is no context processing that happens
at the level of the embeddings.
The context modulations only start happening in the transformer blocks.
In particular in the attention subblocks.
Well, I'm sure you are super duper excited to see the code and start experimenting around with it.
So let's now switch to Python.
Here are some libraries to import.
Here I'm importing GPT two XL and pushing it to the GPU.
And of course I'm setting it to eval mode.
Here I'm incorporating the text.
We are actually going to look at some different texts in the next exercise in the code challenge.
But for here I'm just taking actually not that much.
Just a couple of thousand tokens actually.
Just really 1000 token.
And the reason why I start here, let me just show you the beginning of this.
So the beginning of the book is actually just this preliminary information about Project Gutenberg and
so on.
So I just wanted to cut out that information.
So I'm just getting 1000 tokens from the actual book itself.
Okay.
So those are the tokens that I will push through the model.
And here are the shuffled tokens that we will use as a reference.
So it's all the same tokens.
All I'm doing is randomly, completely randomizing the order of the tokens that are already present.
So it's a pretty interesting experimental approach.
It is literally exactly the same tokens that go into the model.
But of course the sequence is different.
Okay.
So then here I'm pushing the real and the shuffle Shuffled tokens through the model, checking the size
of the output and creating a variable called num hidden for the number of hidden layers.
That's just a variable that will be useful for the, uh, for the for loops later on.
Okay, so we see that the hidden states is of size one by 1000 by 1600.
So one sequence in this batch and 1000 tokens and 1600 dimensions, uh, in the uh, embeddings and
the number of hidden states, very, uh, tensors.
So the number of these data matrices that we have is 49.
That corresponds to the 48 transformer blocks in GPT two XL plus.
The first one is the output of the token embeddings plus the position embeddings.
Okay.
And then here I calculate the dimensionality metrics.
I already showed this code in the uh slides.
So I'm looping over all of the layers, extract the activations, uh, bring them back from the GPU
to the CPU and then numpy ify them.
By the way, this here this code works if you have exactly one sequence in your batch.
If you have multiple sequences in a batch, then you would need to modify this code a little bit.
So just something to keep in mind if you are going to use this code for other analyses.
Uh, here I am.
Mean centering.
That's an important first step in, uh, principal components analysis and SVD and Eigendecomposition.
If you do not mean center, then the first component simply points to the mean offset, which is not
really what we want in these kinds of analyses.
We want all the components to point along the directions of covariance and not the mean offset.
So the entire data is shifted.
It's translated so that it's centered at the origin of the space.
Okay.
Then here I do singular value decomposition.
This function returns the left singular vectors, the singular values, and the right singular vectors.
So it gives three outputs for this particular analysis.
We do not care about the vectors.
We only want the values.
So that's why I'm just exporting one over here the second of these outputs.
So let me first show you what this looks like.
Uh let's see.
So I can just write out s you can see it's a big vector.
There's a lot of these numbers.
There's a thousand of them in particular.
And actually, you know maybe I will start with this.
So x dot shape, this is uh yeah.
It's the activations matrix, the output of one layer.
And it's 1000 tokens by 1600 Dimensions.
Okay.
So then we get s dot shape and there are a thousand of those.
And why are there a thousand and not 1600?
Because it's whatever is the smaller of the two dimensions in the data matrix for linear algebra reasons
that you can learn about in a linear algebra course.
Okay.
Let's uh, let's just have a quick look.
So here we see the singular value spectrum.
It looks like it's very large in the beginning.
And then it goes down.
Now these raw values here, these are related to the scale of the data to the numbers in the data.
And that's fine if you have some way to interpret that.
But mostly what we want to do with these singular values, especially for a principal components analysis
or compression or dimensionality analysis, is to transform them into percent of variance accounted
for.
And that you see here.
So each individual singular value squared, divided by the sum of all of the singular values squared.
This gives me proportion of variance explained, and then I multiply it by 100 and that gives me percent
of variance explained.
So now I can plot that one and that you see here.
So the first component accounts for around 23% of the variance.
And all of these components down here account for a tiny tiny fraction of the variance like way less
than 1%.
So, you know, if you think back to this analogy with a piece of paper, this is like a 1000 dimensional
piece of paper, but, you know, maybe two or 800 or 900 of these sides of the paper are so thin that
they contain very little information.
They are technically present in the piece of paper, but they're super duper thin.
And really all the thickness in the paper is happening in the first several dozen of these, uh, components.
Okay.
So now we can transform this into the cumulative sum, and that looks like this.
So now if we want to know how many components, how many directions in the data space does it take to
account for 90% of the variance?
All we have to do is read off 90% over here.
So 90 that corresponds to I don't know what this is like.
Maybe, uh, one 190 components gets us to 90% variance.
So now what we can do to analyze this more concretely is say which of these.
Actually, let me just show you what this looks like in numbers.
So it starts off as around 22%.
And then it keeps getting monotonically higher.
But the rate at which it increases is is decreasing because all of these successive components account
for like 0.010.00 3% variance from this component to the next.
Okay.
So now what we want to do is find how many components it takes to account for, let's say, 95% of the
variance.
So one way we can do that is having this boolean here and saying which of these vectors are above 95.
And what we want is this value over here.
That is the first component index at which the cumulative sum of all of the variances explained accounts
for more than 95%.
So then we can use numpy dot where.
And basically that tells us, you know, this is the answer that we're looking for.
So I hope that explanation made sense.
That is the explanation of this line of code down here.
Okay.
So that is all of this code here.
This code here is exactly the same code.
It's copy pasted.
I removed some of the comments.
The only difference is using this variable here for the shuffled tokens instead of the real tokens.
Uh, and then yeah, here I'm putting the results into a different element on this final dimension for
these results matrices here.
This code cell here is a little bit of an aside.
This is just the code that I wrote to generate the figure that I showed in the slides.
Uh, you don't really need it.
It's not really a core part of this Python demo, but I just thought I would include it anyway just
because I used it in the slides.
Okay, now what I want to do is show the visualization.
So, uh, let me show the plot first, and then I'll go back and explain each part of it.
So this plot here shows the cumulative variance explained.
That's literally exactly the plot that I showed you a moment ago.
But here I'm showing it as lines instead of dots.
And I'm using a separate color for each of the layers.
And then to get the effective dimensionality at 95% of variance explained, what we do is find the 95
percentile up here.
And for each layer, what is the number of components that matches that line at 95.
Okay.
So then we extract that for all of these lines and all of these lines.
And then I can make this scatter plot that you saw here.
So it's pretty interesting to compare the real vectors versus the shuffled token vectors.
And essentially what you see is that they overlap pretty consistently for the first, let's say quarter
of the Transformers.
And what does this tell us?
This tells us that within each of these transformers, the amount of space in the total data matrix
space that the actual token processing is taking up is pretty comparable for the shuffled and the real
tokens.
And it's only later in the model.
Later in the transformer blocks, that we start to see some real differentiation where the shuffled
tokens are actually occupying a slightly smaller subspace.
And the real tokens are occupying a larger space.
And why does this generally get bigger?
Remember that as we get deeper into the model, the model is learning to incorporate more and more context
into the processing of the current token in order to transform it into a next token.
So that is pretty difficult to do, and therefore the complexity of the representations and the calculations
Populations increases.
And so the model needs to basically expand the effective dimensionality of the analysis here.
Of course you see these are also a little bit unusual.
These are a bit outliers here.
This is the final transformer block.
This is what goes directly to the embeddings matrix and then to the transformed into text after one
token is selected.
Once you get the concept of this analysis approach you can apply it to lots of different data sets.
And now the exact numerical results will depend on the threshold, which itself is a bit arbitrary.
You know why use 95% variance explained as a threshold?
Why not 94%?
Or how about 98.327%?
So it is a good idea to explore different thresholds and interpret relative dimensionalities and not
the exact number.
Also, keep in mind that there really are no linear calculations inside a deep learning model as big
as an LN inside the model.
Every linear calculation like dot product, for example, has a nonlinear transform before it and after
it.
So there are like slices of linearity, but those are sandwiched in between non-linearities.
So I am a huge fan of using linear analysis methods.
They tend to be stable and robust and easier to interpret, but a compelling result of a linear analysis
does not mean that the computation itself inside the model is linear.
Anyway, if you enjoyed this code demo, then you are definitely going to enjoy the code challenge in
the next video, where you will get to build on the knowledge and skills that you gained here.